# embedding
Embedding is a javascript library that makes it easy to create data-driven environments. It is built on three.js, and takes inspiration from D3.

A major hypothesis driving the development of Embedding is that direct navigation and manipulation of environments provide fundamentally new opportunities in the creation of compelling data visualization, exploration, and discovery experiences - in particular, the ability to directly change the viewpoint via position- and direction-tracked camera in VR.

# Installation

# Main Abstractions

- A *dataset* is a collection of data points. 
	- Data points can have arbitrary attributes, and always have a default value attribute
	- Basic dataset types are data frames, graphs
	- Datasets can have many backing implementations, including implementations that load and/or stream data from non-local data stores
	- Datasets can be updated: data points added and removed, and existing data points modified. These changes are tracked via an event system, and dependent embeddings notified

- An *embedding* is a method of placing data points in space. Embeddings can be static, in which case the position and rendering of each data point is fixed, or dynamic
	- Embeddings are characterized by 
		- Placement
		- Rendering
		- Updating
	- Multiple embeddings can depend on the same dataset

# Example Embeddings

- Random: each point is assigned a random position; configuration by random distribution and parameter values, point mass and size
	- Placement is by random draw
	- Rendering is by random draw as well, or by input parameters
- Snowfall: each point is realized as a particle, governed by simple physics; configuration by gravity, turbulence, point mass and size
	- Placement is initially randomized
	- Rendering is by input parameters, and also possibly by binding to data point attributes
	- Updating is by physics (gravity, turbulence)
- Scatter: each point is realized as a particle or mesh.
	- Placement is determined by bindings to data point atributes
	- Rendering is by binding to attributes
- River: each point is realized as a mesh that follows a path
	- Placement is initialized at path start, possibly with some randomization
	- Rendering is by input parameters and data point attribute binding
	- Updating is by physics (fluid dynamics)
- Tree: each point is realized as a "leaf" on a hierarchical tree structure whose branches can grow and shrink over time
- Graph: each point is a node on a graph
	- Placement is by graph layout algorithm, such as force directed

# Relationship to other projects

- Three.js is the foundation for Embedding. It is a general-purpose 3D engine, and does not contain the abtractions that save so much effort in Embedding.
- D3 is, in many ways, the inspiration for Embedding. D3 stands for "data-driven documents", whereas Embedding is all about creating "data-driven environments" - environments which the user is able to explore directly.
- A-Frame is a declarative framework for WebVR. It makes it very easy to create scenes whose components are largely fixed and static; by constrast, Embedding makes it easy to create environments whose components are not known at coding time, but are dynamically generated by the data.
- WebVR is the  W3C specification that describes common VR functionality from within web browsers, including the API available to developers of VR libraries and experiences. It is supported by both Chrome and Firefox.